---
layout: post
title:  "Silencing the Past with Wikidata"
date:   2021-03-16 08:00:00 -0500
categories:
tags: Rochambeau, classification, archives, Haiti, linked data
---

I recently presented a paper at the Louisiana State University Graduate History Student Conference about the way archives, the primary sources of history, are themselve subject to historical forces and ideologies. I demonstrated this through the strange history of "the Rochambeau Papers," the name given to several different archival collections drawn from this family of French generals of the Age of Revolutions. My particular interest was in the disassembly of the papers of [Donatien-Marie-Joseph de Vimeur, vicomte de Rochambeau](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donatien-Marie-Joseph_de_Vimeur,_vicomte_de_Rochambeau)(1755-1813), a process that spread his archives across the Atlantic world. Variously described to be "about" the Napoleonic era, the French military, or Haitian independence, Rochambeau's maps, correspondence, and other documents were reorganized, repackaged, and sold in 1958 by rare book seller [H. P. Kraus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hans_P._Kraus). Today historians will encounter segments of Rochambeau's papers at the Archives Nationales (France), the Beinecke Library at Yale University, the George Smathers Library at the University of Florida, the Biblioteca Nacional José Martí in Havana, Cuba, and at the Archives Nationales d'Haïti, although this later set seem to be lost<sup>[1](#footnote1)</sup>.

In his classic work, *Silencing the Past*, Michel-Rolph Trouillot pointed to "the Rochambeau Papers" in Gainesville, Florida as an example of the power dynamics at play in the process of history making<sup>[2](#footnote2)</sup>. Power is wielded not only in the narrating of history, deciding whose stories to tell and whose to omit, but also at the moment sources are inscribed and when they are assembled into archives. These Rochambeau papers mostly cover Donatien's activities in the Caribbean during the last phase of the Haitian Revolution. However, they exist in diaspora across the Atlantic because the people buying and selling them in the twentieth century decided they were about the Napoleonic Wars. By ascribing the manuscripts to one category we tacitly exclude them from another. 

[Wikidata](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page) is an expansive project that attempts to categorize and describe millions of items into semantic relationships that are structured to be intelligble to humans and machine-readable. Thus, every item can be describe in so-called triples: item-property-value, all of which have unique identifying codes. For example, in Wikidata [Donatien de Rochambeau](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q1240667) (Q1240667) has the property "military rank" (P410) which has a value "general" (Q83460). Where this gets interesting, however, and relevent to the story related above, is that Rochambeau also has an assigned property "conflict" (P607) meaning  "battles, wars, or other military engagement in which the person or item participated." For Rochambeau, these include the American Revolutionary War (Q40949), the French Revolutionary Wars (Q207318), and the Napoleonic Wars (Q78994). The Haitian Revolution (Q689128) is not listed even though Rochambeau was the last general of the French expeditionary force attempting to quell the slave revolt. Rochambeau's surrender to General Jean-Jacques Dessalines (Q212068) in 1803 precipitated Dessalines declaring Haiti an independent nation. The Haitian Revolution is also missing from the Wikidata entry for Charles Leclerc (Q503201), Napoleon's (Q517) brother-in-law and the original general of the expeditionary force who famously died of yellow fever along with many of his troops.

Upon further exploration, it seems Wikidata has classified the Haitian Revolution as "part of" (P361) the French Revolutionary Wars. The two conflicts are no doubt related, but we can see the effect subsuming one into the other has on the structure of data here. The Haitian Revolution is silenced at a structural level for at least these two French generals, one of whom literally died in Haiti. Furthermore, Dessalines is listed as a "participant in" (P1344) the Haitian Revolution, but not as a combatant in the  French Revolutionary Wars. According to Wikidata, Toussaint Louverture (Q205783), who alternately fought for and against the French during the late eighteenth century, was a participant in (P1344) the Haitian Revolution but was engaged in the conflict (P607) known as the Napoleonic Wars. There seems to be a deep inconsistency in how these conflicts function as values, to which property they should be ascribed, and to whose Wikidata pages. I may not be able to untangle all of this at a structural level, but I did add the Haitian Revolution to both Leclerc and Rochambeau's wikidata pages.

I was also interested to see the property "archives at" (P485) in Wikidata. This has the potential to be very useful for historians trying to track down the many locations in which they might encounter primary sources. However, the data for this property are incomplete. For Rochambeau, the "archives at" property only has as a value Defence Historical Service (Q1340921), which is not even correct. Admittedly there may be some personnel record at this military archives in Vincennes, France (Q193819), but the actual papers of Rochambeau that remain in France are at the branch of the Archives Nationales (Q182542) located in Pierrefitte-sur-Seine (Q253939) on the outskirts of Paris. The great thing about adding an "archives at" property to an item is that the editor can include a reference URL (P854), in this case a direct link to the online finding aid for archival collections when available. For Rochambeau, I have successfully added the Archives Nationales, the George A. Smathers Libraries (Q5536006) at the University of Florida, the Biblioteca Nacional José Martí (Q5728066), and the Beinecke Library (Q814779) at Yale to the "archives at" property for Rochambeau. Now, if you query Wikidata to see who was engaged in the conflict (P607) the Haitian Revolution (Q689128), and in that list show the property "archives at" (P485), you will now find Donatien de Rochambeau included along with the five potential archives where you will find his papers.

---
<a name="footnote1">1.</a> David Patrick Geggus, *The Caribbean Collections at the University of Florida: A Brief Description* ( Gainesville, Fla: University of Florida Libraries, 1985), 6-7.
<a name="footnote2">2.</a> Michel-Rolph Trouillot, *Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1995), 165n19.