---
layout: post
title:  "Paths Forward"
date:   2021-04-22 09:00:00 -0500
categories: TPUS
tags: Florida, archives, historiography
---

My work with *The Territorial Papers of the United States* this spring has been in the context of a course on computational methods in the humanities, but also my deeper questions about the relationship between archives and archival labor and the professional practice of history. As the semester comes to a close, now is a good time to reflect on what I've learned and accomplished, identify skills I still need to develop, and outline some potential paths forward.

I have spent a good portion of the past semester cleaning textual data from *The Territorial Papers of the United States* (TPUS). I have learned a lot about regular expressions, the power of OpenRefine to clean tabular data, and am beginning to learn what is possible with XML-encoded text. I recognized early on that it made sense to tag the documents of the TPUS because the metadata attached to each document was just as important as the content. It is worth reiterating here that I chose to work with the TPUS not to study the history of early nineteenth-century Florida, per se, but instead to consider the TPUS as a historical artifact itself. Certainly the documents transcribed and reproduced with the TPUS have some use for historians working on the territorial period of Florida, but I am more interested in what the TPUS as a publication project says about the assembly of archives, the prism through which historians have viewed their potential sources, and the influence such structural work has on the historiography. 

Let's step back and consider the history of the TPUS in order to glimpse the structural weight of archives and archival publications. The project's origins date back to the early 1900s, when scientific history, based on archival evidence, was taking hold in Europe and the United States. The new scientific history meant historians needed access to archival documents. In the United States, which lacked a central national archive until 1934, this proved challenging. Unlike the records of the thirteen "original" colonies, which were housed within state borders or in London, territories that became states between 1789 and 1873<sup>1</sup> were in Washington, D. C., and dispersed among a number of agencies and departments, often disorganized and largely inaccessible. According to J. Franklin Jameson in 1911, "there has been a sufficient want of logic and system in the distribution [of these territorial papers] to make it impossible for anyone to predict with certainty where a given paper may be found."<sup>2</sup>     

In response to this situation, the American Historical Association lobbied the United States government to make archival documents more readiliy available by publishing them, which the Congress authorized and funded in 1925. The selection and arrangement of documents was to be based on the Calendar of papers in Washington archives published by David Parker in 1911, the source of Jameson's quote above. This is noteworthy when considering how the intellectual structure given to archives in one generation laid the foundation for historical and archival work in the next. After an initial phase of locating and copying documents, and a brief lapse in funding, Clarence Edwin Carter was appointed editor of *The Territorial Papers of the United States* in 1931.

Carter followed in the path blazed by Parker and Jameson, taking for granted that the TPUS should treat each territory as a unit with documents arranged chronologically. He also reaffirmed the emphasis on administrative documents since to him the territories were first and foremost administrative problems for the federal government. Jameson had also noted in his Preface to Parker's *Calendar* that
>"the interest of historical writers at the present time is, and in the immediate future it will apparently continue to be, greatest in respect to those papers which have to do with the territory as a whole, as an administrative unit, as an organic body of population on its way to statehood, and which accordingly have to do, in one sense or another, with its government and its constitutional and political history."<sup>3</sup> 

Carter also recognized that he could not publish every document relating to the admnistration of each territory. As a result, he devised is own selection criteria which excluded from publication the majority of papers from the General Land Office, the courts, and those relating to the Indian, military, or diplomatic affairs. The papers in these categories were simply too numerous to include in their entirety. Such exclusions surely had a significant effect on the content of the TPUS, and the Florida volumes in particular. As a result, a scholar who relied on the TPUS for primary sources would surely have a skewed sense of the scale and importance of some historical themes.

And this brings us back to my interest in applying computational methods to the TPUS. I am less interested in the contents of individual documents than I am in measuring the collection as a whole. How did the decisions of Jameson, Parker, Carter and other early twentieth century historians shape the histories written about territorial Florida through their organization and framing of the archival sources historians had at their disposal? The decisions these historians made about inclusion and exclusion of documents from the TPUS clearly had some impact, but how do we measure that impact?

The visualizations from [my last post](https://adambeauchamp.github.io/home/tpus/2021/04/14/view-from-30000-linear-feet.html) begin to reveal the contours of the Florida volumes of the TPUS. The relative number of documents included from various agencies and department is interesting, but to make sense of these numbers we also need to understand the scale of documents not included. For example, the number of documents from the Office of Indian Affairs (OIA) seems to dwindle over the 1821-1845 timespan of the Florida volumes. Why is this? And is this representative of a decrease in total documents in the archives? Carter noted his exclusion of many documents relating to indigenous peoples precisely because they were so numerous, so the decrease in OIA records in the TPUS needs further interrogation. 

I am also interested in measuring the relative impact of the TPUS on historical scholarship. If the TPUS was an important source of archival documents, then we can infer the inclusion and exclusion of documents would have an effect on the historical literature. To explore this hypothesis, the next step in this project is to compare the contents of the TPUS with the historical literature on this period of Florida and United States history. We experimented briefly with topic modeling earlier in this project and I would like to return to this method. Through topic modeling, I want to compare the major subjects of the TPUS documents to historical works that cited and that did not cite the TPUS volumes. I will be looking for alignment between the TPUS topics and those in histories that rely on them, and a divergence in topics from the TPUS in histories that do not. Is there a correlation between the documents selected by Carter and his predecessors and the histories they begat? Hopefully the results of topic modeling will open new paths of inquiry that can be explored through close readings and further analysis of the sources used in relevant histories of the period.

For this next phase in the project, I see two primary tasks. First, I need to further develop my skills with XML-encoded texts. So far I have been able to create XML tags through simple (and complex) regular expressions and tranform those files into tables via OpenRefine. For the large scale analysis of documents required for topic modeling, I need to learn XML query skills to quickly parse XML-encoded texts, create files, and run topic modeling programs. That should be the "easy" part. The more challenging task will be to assemble corpora of published historical scholarship that can also be analyzed with topic modeling. So far the simplest solution seems to be using journal articles available in *JSTOR*. Since these articles are already keyword searchable and digitized in a machine-readable format, there won't be a much cleaning as with the TPUS volumes. However, extracting relevant articles will require some careful search strings, and extracting large numbers of copyrighted articles may involve working through *JSTOR*'s native "Data for Research" tools or other text-mining support. The articles might be available to researchers, but unlike the TPUS, will be protected by copyright and cannot be hosted in GitHub. Also, articles available in *JSTOR* may provide an interesting sample with which to test my hypothesis, but are in no way representative of historical scholarship, which privileges monographs. The methods of literary scholars, like Ted Underwood, may offer some ideas for how to extend this line of inquiry into the world of books.<sup>3</sup>

If we think of archival sources as data, then we can quickly recognize how the selection, categorization, and assembly of the TPUS as a dataset introduces specific perspectives and biases into any conclusions drawn from these data. This harkens back to the mid-twentieth century notion that data are ["theory-laden"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory-ladenness) and is reinforced in modern data science and critical algorithm studies as examined in [*Data Feminisim*](https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/), Algorithms of Oppression, and Weapons of Math Destruction, among other important works.<sup>4</sup> This also runs parallel to the theoretical framing of Michel-Rolphe Trouillot, who we engaged with early on this project, and who perceived historical silencing at every stage of history making, from the creation of sources to the assembly of archives to the writing of historical narratives. My hope is that by working at the intersection of Trouillot's philosophy of history and the insights of critical data studies, I can shed new light on the significance of archival labor in the creation of historical knowledge.



---
### Notes
1. In 1873, federal administration of territories was centralized in the Department of the Interior. Thus, the records were also centralized for the first time under one agency.

2. J. Franklin Jameson, preface to *Calendar of Papers in Washington Archives Relating to the Territories of the United States (to 1873)*, by David W. Parker (Washington, D. C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1911), 4.

3. Ted Underwood, *Distant Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Change* (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2019).

4. Catherine D’Ignazioand Lauren F. Klein, *Data Feminism* (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 2020); Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism* (New York: New York University Press, 2018); Cathy O’Neil, *Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy* (New York: Crown, 2016).


